Months ago,
It was one of the pet peeves, uh, that I have.
Well, good. Perfect person.
This is your area of expertise. Yeah.
You perfect person to be here today.
Good afternoon. It's, uh, DIA. Well, we'll just start.
I'll tell you what you are welcome to come to the table
and we've got our, um, submitter and then we'll come to you
after that and I've got one a little bit easier to follow.
Alright. Do we have, uh, Melinda McGregor?
Um, um,
would either of you like some water?
Um, yeah, yeah. Thank you.
Actually I would like, yeah, thanks a lot.
Oh, there it's, yeah,
My blind fine.
I usually get it done before. Bit of bit late today.
Water. Debating it in. Thank
You.
Whiskey is a drop line, Right?
Uh, here we go. We've got, uh, Melinda McGregor. Kiara.
Thank you. So now you've got the petitions committee here.
Um, there's for us, I'm, uh, Gregor O'Connor.
I'm the chair, which interested ourselves
because we've got others in the room,
um, and others waiting.
So we'll do the intro now. Um, we'll start on my right.
Hello. Hello, Melinda. Uh, good afternoon.
I'm Paula Garcia. I'm the National MP for Newly
And I'm Ham Campbell.
I'm the MP for Island
and acting as the Deputy Chief's staff.
Thank you Kiara.
I'm Ka Carter List MP for the Greens,
and I'm based in Christchurch as well.
Alright, so now we've got you for 10 minutes.
Um, be, um, it's your time,
however, if you could leave time for questions,
um, it would be good.
So 10 minutes floor is yours.
Thank you, Greg. Um, KDA. My name is Melinda McGregor.
Um, I'm speaking today on my petition sent
to Parliament on the required changes
to the dog control laws in New Zealand.
Specifically that councils need clear guidelines of
required action following dog attacks.
As you would've read in my statement,
that my mother was attacked by a dog,
and this has led me
to be her voice in advocating for change.
This is an emotive topic due to the severity of
what happened and the after effects.
First and foremost, I want to state
that our family are dog lovers and have always had dogs.
I will start by giving you a brief picture of what happened,
why I believe there needs to be change,
and how these changes can be implemented.
When we arrived on the scene of the dog attack,
the paramedic declared
that this wasn't just a normal dog bite.
This was a vicious attack that had gone right through
to the bone, leaving three separate puncture wounds on mum's
body and a severed finger.
The paramedics words were, this dog should be euthanized.
This attack had left mum in hospital for two weeks, then on
to respite care for a further two weeks.
The aftermath of the dog attack was that the WMA Council
contacted me stating they wouldn't be taking this case any
further due to mum having dementia, and
therefore it wouldn't stand up in court.
The council took two drawn out weeks to come up
with their judgment not to go ahead
with the decision to euthanize.
They did, however, classify the dog as dangerous
and the dog was desexed to ask.
This wasn't a suitable outcome due to the severity
of the incident and the aftermath.
The council seemed more concerned with the fact
that this was a breeding dog
and that the elderly man
who was walking the dog was distressed and apologetic.
This was a breeding dog that had, according
to the elderly man in charge of the dog at the time,
had done this before, but it had not been reported.
My thoughts to the council skewed response is
that surely this incident shouldn't have needed to go
through the court system at all.
Clearly it shouldn't matter the victim's age
or ability when an attack is of this nature
and with medical professionals responding to the fact
that the dog was obviously vicious
and that it should be euthanized,
that surely this should be enough justification for councils
to follow through on.
I believe that if there was a standardized scale
similar to that of Dr.
Ian Dunbar's scale of severity for dog bites, one
that is created to be unique to New Zealand, our dog,
our council dog control officers would have
guidelines to follow.
And this would lead to clarity not only for them,
but for victims and dog owners
to also know where they stand.
The New Zealand Veterinary Association
and the SPCA support the introduction
of a nationwide stepped approach for managing dog attacks,
moving away from the breed specific provisions
that are currently in place.
It doesn't matter the breed of the dog, any dog can bite.
They go on to say
that having this in place would reduce administrative
burdens on councils
and improve public confidence
with current dog control practices, dog control statistics
of the tax and destruction orders reported to councils
documented from 2018 to 2023.
Um, state there were zero destruction orders from
the W Council.
Ash Burton Council, her Hui Council,
and the Central Otago Council
with very low numbers from remaining
councils apart from Auckland.
This is covering a five year period,
which surprises me considering the media coverage
of dog attacks that have happened throughout New Zealand.
My key points for change are that council should not have
to go through court proceedings when the impact on the
victim has been so substantial that they've needed surgery
and hospitalization.
A nationwide clear mandatory approach
for all councils to follow.
Using a step to process giving councils
clarity in their practice.
My recommendation would be to base this on Dr.
Ian Dunbar's dog bite scale categorizing bites into
different categories with varying degrees of seriousness.
However, the formulation of the scale should include
and collaborate with our own dog experts,
the Veterinary Association, SPCA
and medical professionals to formulate a scale
that represents our own requirements.
Inoa, my recommendations would be for all councils
to give this out to all owners upon registering their dogs,
leaving dog owners with clarity about
what happens if their dog was to bite
the outcome would have stronger emphasis on the victim's
rights and needs for breeders to be subject
to checks from authorities,
ensuring their dogs are socialized,
demonstrate good temperament,
and show appropriate behaviors, or
before being granted a license to breed.
We are currently relying on decent dog owners
to make ethical decisions
to make the right call when it shouldn't be left up to them.
I support the New Zealand Veterinary Association
recommendations to implement their use
of their dog scale bite, dog bite scale, rather
specifically in their levels five and six.
They talk about avoiding court proceedings in these severe
cases, therefore reducing trauma for victims
and conserving council resources.
The SPCA are also backing the call for a dog
by scale to be mandated.
They note in their submission to my petition
that woefully in 2024, the Supreme Court of New Zealand
ruled that a conviction is a precondition to an order
for destruction being made under Section 57 3
of the Dog Control Act.
Sharma versus Auckland Council
as securing a conviction is a precondition
for destruction orders.
Now the outcome of this is
that counsels may now be more cautious about proceeding
with the destruction order.
If there are concerns about sufficiency of the evidence
or the availability to secure a conviction in court.
This could result in unintended consequences in situations
such as when the victim is unable
to provide a formal statement
or testify as described in my submission.
Furthermore, these legal uncertainties often lead
to prolonged and distressing court cases
and several incidences.
Dogs have been held in council for up
to two years while legal proceedings are underway.
Prolonged confinement in such environments can severely
compromise animal welfare
and lead to deterioration behavior.
They go on to say that a nationally
consistent evidence-based approach is likely
to result in a more timely proportionate
and humane resolution In these cases,
it would also reduce the need for lengthy litigation,
protect animal welfare
and provide fairer outcomes for all parties involved.
I questioned, did the Supreme Court involve the New Zealand
Veterinary Association,
the SPCA medical experts in their field
and dog attack victims before making such a ruling?
I'll conclude my statement
by saying Mum was innocently going
for a peaceful Sunday walk when she came across this dog.
This incident has set her dementia back with her now needing
to be in a dementia care home.
She was brave enough to be made by the Yac Council to have
to relive the incident being interviewed
and recorded in hospital
by two council dog control officers.
She found the courage to say that it, that it was important
to share what had happened to her so
that it wouldn't happen again to other people.
I feel strongly that what happened to mum
and how the council went about it
isn't good enough for New Zealand.
We need to hold higher standards of care
for human life and wellbeing.
Council practices need to change urgently
before another type of this attack happens.
Again, thank you for your time.
Alright, thank you Melinda.
Very good submission and I can, very emotional
and uh, I I hope your mother is, uh, is, um, coming right.
Um, and over attack.
Now we've got time for a couple of minutes
for questions here, members.
Um, one question I just will ask is that, um, often the,
by the time this gets to court, it's actually the owner
that's on trial as well.
Um, and that, um, separating this, if we get,
um, a sort of formulaic approach to the dog
and the response to the dog, um,
it may detract from often the owner's, um,
liability or contribution to this situation,
but they may not have refused
to put them on leads, et cetera.
Mm-hmm. Do you see an issue there
because, um, obviously the owner of a
or of a, of a dog needs to be responsible as well?
Yes, most definitely.
Um, yes, I agree a hundred percent with that. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, however, I think what,
where I'm standing strongly is that, um, there needs
to be change within our council's practices
and to make it a consistent practice throughout New Zealand
with all councils so
that the dog control officers can base their decision making
on clear steps that are really a, you know, Dr.
Ian Dunbar's scale is a very clear scale to base it off.
However, I do believe it that, um,
that within New Zealand we could create something
that is specific to us,
but that the levels where a dog does attack, um,
and, and it goes and it severs and,
and the, um, the victim ends up in hospital.
I do believe that it shouldn't even have
to go through the court system.
Alright. Uh, Dr. Campbell, excellent.
Uh, thank you Melinda,
and thank you for bringing this to, to parliament
and want to just acknowledge the trauma
that your mother has has, has gone, gone through.
Um, and my question is
probably a little, little bit similar.
So you, you are wanting a discreet scale for, um,
councils then to kind of make a choice, choice on, um,
and this in effect would cover every, every dog attack,
every dog bite.
Yes. Um, do, do,
do you think somewhere in the scale there should be,
and look, this is not, um,
I'm not suggesting your mother had any antagonizing effect
on the dog, but if, if a dog was provoked,
if a dog was maybe mistreated
and then lashed out, how would that scale?
Yes. Be the, the, if you, if if I was an owner of a dog
that was mistreated by someone else
and it lashed out, um, potentially I run the risk of losing
a, a loved companion.
Um, sure. How, how would you see that being dealt with?
Yes. And there would be provision within that scale.
Now, um, Dr.
Ian Dunbar scale has six levels,
and it's the last two levels that I guess enable
and allow for, um, the justification for, for that to,
you know, for, uh, euthanasia to happen.
However, there's four scales that, um, you know,
prior to that, that that, that talk about that very thing is
that actually in the first, in the first sort of three,
four scales, they talk about that dogs being, you know,
antagonized or can, you know, by children or whatever.
And, and the formula around that is that dog training and,
and those things to be put in place.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, I suppose it was kind of more serious.
Um, and unfortunately some animals are treated very cruelly.
Um, and so it was just making sure
that there's properly room for that to be actually a, a,
a circumstance in the scale.
Yes. And you're right, it really does need that room.
And that's where, um, my perspective around, um, you know,
formulating a scale unique to New Zealand, um,
where we have, um, the medical professionals alongside, um,
the veterinary association alongside the SPCA, um,
when we're formulating our own unique scale,
but within that scale when hospitalization
and when, um, there is a, a severing of a body part
that actually that, that we have the right to not need
to have to go through the court system.
Alright, look, well thank you.
We've, I've gone slightly over time,
but, uh, it's been a, um, excellent submission.
Thank you. Um, we'll now be, uh, what,
what we do now will be, um, speaking
to the other parties who've submitted
and then we'll committee will report back
with some recommendations.
So thank you very much and, uh, I hope your mother,
um, gets better.
Gilda. Thank you. Right now we have, um, uh,
from the DIA, um, Oli
Oliver and Caram.
Thank you. Welcome.
Um, first of all, on behalf of department, I want
to acknowledge that dog attacks are distressing for victims
and their families, and particularly, um, thank you Melinda,
for sharing your story and,
and definitely a lot of distress, um,
with your family as well.
Um, they're also upsetting
for the wider public council employees and first responders.
Um, so we are here today speaking
to our role supporting the Minister
of Local Government's oversight of the Dog Control Act 1996.
Um, so the Dog Control Act is focused on managing risk
and enables action to be taken
to mitigate unreasonable risk.
The regime is based on dog owners being responsible for the,
um, control of their dogs in compliance with the act.
It provides a framework of infringement
and offenses to manage dog
and prosecute irresponsible owners.
After an incident, offenders can be convicted
through the judicial system and delta fi and doubt fine.
Um, some serious offenses can be also result in the
destruction of dog and determined prison for the owner.
As a dog control act is close to 30 years old,
it would be beneficial to conduct a comprehensive review,
but at this stage it is not a government priority.
Central government agencies like the department do not have
a role in the application
and enforcement of council policies
or the dog control act responding to dog control issues,
including the tax is the role of local councils,
and each council has its own dog controlled bylaw
and policy to do this.
Um, it's often challenging role for council staff,
particularly when vulnerable people
or serious injuries are involved, such as this.
Councils are often stretched for resources
and struggle with staff shortages in this area.
Prosecution through the courts can be a long
and costly undertaking, potentially adding
to victim's distress.
It's important that counsels ensure
that investigations are thorough
and that due process is strictly
observed on the completion of an investigation.
Consideration needs to be given to the adequacy
and weight of evidence.
In light of the costs and time related to prosecution.
Councils may reserve, um, action in the judicial system
for only the most serious cases,
taking into account animal shelter capacity
and opportunity costs.
The pitch edition notes
that the guidelines surrounding the Gold Dog
Control Act are unclear.
The department has previously issued enforcement guidelines
to support local government sectors work in
delivering dog control.
We've recently agreed with the minister of local government
to refresh these guidelines in partnership with councils.
This will support more effective
and consistent enforcement
of dog control act across New Zealand.
I also note the petitioner's proposal
of a dog bite scale is a tool
to inform council officers actions following dog attacks.
The dog bite scale is useful,
but it, um, may have operational challenges if it is made
mandatory in legislation, at least little discretion
for judgment for councils
or a right of appeal to the judiciary.
The department appreciates that the current process
for dealing with dog control issues is a long process,
while identifying a faster process would have some benefits.
This may be, um, this must be balanced
by all parties right to the due process.
Without this process, there can be serious errors made
to dogs and the owners who may face convictions
if you take any questions.
Alright, thank you. Just with the initiation,
what initiates now the process
to have a dog euthanized?
Is it, are you prosecuting the owner
and the euthanizing is a consequence of that prosecution?
I mean, what, how, how do you begin a prosecution
or you don't I know, but how
Do the councils do that? Do you know how councils,
So basically how councils would, uh, begin the process
of euthanizing a dog?
There are two ways to do this.
The first involves convicting the owner on conviction.
Uh, where a dog has caused serious injury,
the dog can be euthanized.
So the, so as a consequence of the conviction
of the owner, the, that there will be,
the euthanization will be a consequence, right? Yep.
So the second pathway is also present where a dog,
for example, section 57 does note that if a dog is rushing
or attacking an animal, a person,
or making serious, uh, damage to property,
then they can also be euthanized on the spot as well.
So if they're being attacked and on, in defense, uh,
serious action is required to stop the dog, then if
that leads to destruction of the dog,
that is also all right.
Um, but the dog can also be euthanized if that is done.
And there is evidence to that.
I know in rural areas, often the police are called
and they'll use, they'll do the, they'll, they'll,
they'll shoot a dog that's attacking sheep.
Is that a separate, that's not a
through this process at all, is it?
Is that what, what, well, I shouldn't know.
I was in the brief. What, what powers
did police use to do that?
Or they acting on behalf of the council? Yeah,
So council police officers, uh,
share powers under the dog control act
with the animal national officers.
So in That's right, given councils are special resources,
police do get involved in rural areas to respond
to problems such as these, and as I explained
before, when dogs are attacking property like sheep
and they, they can be euthanized on the spot.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Y that, um, members, other questions.
What, um, how many of these prosecutions take place?
I mean, statistically, do they, the councils,
presumably you would've trouble, they wouldn't,
are the councils reporting back to you when they do this?
Is there any reporting mechanism?
Um, so if the, the horror for new council were to go
through this process starting today,
how would you find out about it?
So these, uh, is council run,
so they will have statistics to this, right? Um,
What we, it wouldn't be a notification.
You would've to, at some stage go
and collect those statistics.
Ask the to council how many, how many
of these processes have they undertaken?
Yeah. The last 12 months, two years, et cetera. Yes. Okay.
And so there's no thoughts.
What you are telling us is that there's under the dog,
there's no process
and there's no intention to nationalize this, to,
to have anything, uh, to take this away from the councils
as their responsibility.
No. And if, uh, this process were to be introduced,
it would only be a recommendation really.
The the, there's no powers that currently exist.
It would've to be a legislation change. Yes. Yeah.
Even a regulation couldn't allow, um, this
to be standardized.
Like we, we to bring in this test, um,
the the dog bite scale the scale.
Yeah. We, we'd likely need to,
it would require new legislation.
Yeah. Yeah. Alright.
No other questions. Very useful. Thank you very much.
And we now have the
veterinary association, um, line
Video. Unmute yourself.
Oh, sorry. I I've been, you need to unmute
and turn your, here we go.
We've got you there. Ms. Murphy. Right?
We've, we've got you. And hopefully we've got sound as well.
That's, uh, Becky Murphy. Yes. Yes, yes. Yep. Thank you.
No, we've lost your sound. Now.
You must have had that. No, we, we,
Oh, she press, Um, can she see me?
No, we, no, she won't be able to see me.
We can we she got, we
Can hear you.
I don't think she can see us. Can she?
Oh, no, there.
Oh, right now Becky, you've taken those,
you obviously needed those, um, earplugs for the sound
'cause we didn't hear anything you've said.
No, still nothing.
Have to Try again.
No. Who knows? Working. We just, what
I was working when they were taken out at the end
and now we've probably come back.
Okay. Try them out.
That's where the sound goes in, isn't it? Isn't it
There? Yeah. There, there,
there we can hear it. Ah,
There, Got you.
Now Becky,
Oh, There, there is an interim moment, which is
Maybe just remove, yep.
Okay. Try.
Okay. Yeah. Can you hear me now?
Yes, we can now. Lovely.
Sorry, I'm so sorry about that.
Crack d***s technical difficulties. Okay, I'll start again.
Sorry. Um, my name is, uh, Dr. Becky Murphy.
So I am a veterinarian, uh, I'm president
of the Companion Animal Veterinarian's, uh,
special interest branch of the New Zealand Vet Association.
So I'm here to support the intent of this petition
to amend the dog control act so
that every council follows clear, consistent,
mandatory guidelines after a dog attack.
As veterinarians, we see both sides of the issue.
Every week we see the physical
and psychological harm to people, especially children.
And we see the dogs involved, the environments they live in
and the preventable patterns that lead to incidents.
Our message today is simple.
We need a modern behavior based stepped framework
that councils can apply the same way everywhere
with victims at the center and prevention upfront.
Why change? Because the current framework produces different
decisions in different districts.
It leans too heavily on labels
and too lightly on behavior, context and risk.
It leaves victims navigating an uncertain process
and it doesn't make the best use of what we know works.
Education of owners, responsible breeding
and socialization, good containment
and early intervention when warning signs appear.
So what should the law reflect?
First behavior over breed classifications must reflect
what happened, the context in which it happened,
and the risk of re-offense, not the dog's appearance.
Automatic menacing status based on breed sounds
decisive, but it's the wrong tool.
It's not a reliable predictor of risk.
It's difficult to enforce fairly, and it diverts time
and money away from the factors that actually reduce harm.
How dogs are managed, socialized,
supervised, and, and contained.
Focusing on breed can also create a false reassurance.
A family hears that their dogs breed as low risk
and lets supervision slip or the reverse.
A well-managed dog,
a well-managed dog is labeled on looks alone
and resources that should go into training
and containment gets followed by process and dispute.
Meanwhile, the common contributors to bites
roaming poor fences, kids
and dogs unsupervised together, fear
and pain in the dog go unaddressed.
Bottom line, a behavior-based approach is more accurate,
fairer, and more effective.
It targets actual risk in front of us and not stereotypes.
So, second, A stepped proportionate response.
Councils need a single national language
for describing bite severity
and linking the severity to the right action.
The most practical way to do that is
to adapt an objective bite severity scale.
So one best known is the Dr N Dunbar dog bite Scale.
As Melinda's already talked about, a classifies incidents
by the wounds caused not by the dog's type,
which reduces guesswork
and helps decisions be consistent and defensible.
So I'll briefly explain in plain language level one's a
warning, an ear snap
or a display with no skin, no teeth on skin.
Level two is teeth on skin, but no puncture.
You might see a nick or a scrape.
Level three is one to four punctures from a single bite,
none deeper than half the length of a canine tooth.
You may see a simple tear from someone pulling away.
Level four is more serious, one to four punctures
with at least one deeper than half the canine tooth.
Often there's bruising from a hard grip
and two direction tearing from head shaking.
Level five is a multiple by incident
with at least two level four injuries
or multiple attacks with level four in each level.
Six is fatality. Why does it matter?
Because it lets council's tie clear
actions to clear descriptions.
Most incidents sit at level one and two.
These are best served by education and early intervention.
Compulsory training with an accredited professional,
better containment and supervision,
particularly around children.
Level three is a step up.
It usually responds to targeted training and management,
but it shall come with formal conditions and oversight.
Surgical sterilization with loss of gonad hormones,
also known as a ectomy, traditionally known as a DS Xing
and muzzling in public should be required.
Specifying surgical removal of gonad hormones is important
because there are several other ways of sterilizing a dog.
Um, if the other techniques don't remove the goad hormones
and so you don't get the behavioral benefits from
that, which is roaming.
And some, some behavior related problems that are related
to exogenous sex hormones.
Level four is a red flag.
Public safety definitely comes first At this level,
there should be urgent assessment
by an accredited behavior professional
or a beha veterinary behaviorist,
strict confinement in muzzling while that assessment occurs
and a clear enforceable decision based on risk.
Some level four dogs can be safely managed under stringent,
enforceable conditions and some cannot.
The decision should be evidence based and made very quickly.
If the dog is not euthanized,
then he should be surgically sterilized with removal
of gonadal hormones and muscle in public.
As with the level three, levels five
and six are extreme Risk council should have immediate
authority to act to protect the public supported
by veterinary or medical evidence.
So it brings me to the third principle competent assessment
where behavioral assessment is required on a dog.
It must be done by people with the right training skills
and ethical standards.
Accredited professionals using humane evidence-based methods
or veterinary behaviorist council should know exactly
who they can call and the public should know exactly what
that assessment involves.
As clarity builds trust companion animals,
New Zealand has a robust system to accredit such people
and could be used in these situations.
The fourth principle put victims at the center
and get serious about data.
Victims deserve a name, contact set timeframes for updates
and clear information on what happens next,
how long decisions will take, what the options are,
and where to go to for medical and a CC support.
At the same time, every council should record incidents in a
common way and contribute to the,
to a national data set without good data on context,
bite level, contributing factors and outcomes.
We can't target prevention or evaluate what's working.
So how does this align with the petition before you?
The NCVA is fully aligned on the goal clear
mandatory national guidelines.
So councils act consistently and communities are safer.
We support a behavior-based multi-tier framework anchored in
an objective by scale with victim-centered obligations
and national reporting.
There's just one refinement, one difference.
The petition contemplates immediate euthanasia
for level four bites.
We understand why level four injuries are serious
and frightening, and public safety is paramount.
Our recommendation is safety first and still proportionate.
Require urgent assessment by an accredited professional
or a veterinary behaviorist under strict confinement
and muzzling before a final decision is made.
Some level four dogs cannot be made safe
and should not return to the community
and others can be made low risk under
enforceable conditions.
A short expert assessment makes that clear
and keeps the public safe while it happens for levels five
and six where injuries are multiple and severe,
or whether there has been a fatality,
council should have immediate authority to act supported
by clinical evidence to protect the public
and to minimize further trauma to victims.
So what should be in the act at a high level by our opinion,
require a national bite level classification
for every reported incident Require councils
to link each level to define powers, timeframes,
and owner obligations require
that when an assessment is needed, it is performed
by an accredited professional Using humane.
Evidence-based methods require a victim care pathway
with mandated contact points
and access to decisions require national data
and annual reporting.
So we can learn target prevention
and measure progress require owner
and breeder licensing to reflect on dog ownership
as a privilege and the importance of early socialization
and adult behavioral outcomes.
These aren't theoretical changes.
They're practical, implementable
and already used in parts of the sector.
They will reduce serious harm, shorten decision timeframes,
and increase public confidence.
Most importantly, it will focus attention
where it belongs on behaviors
and environments we can change.
So I'll end where I begin.
Dogs are a valued part of life in our country.
Most are well loved and well managed,
but when things go wrong,
the consequences can be devastating.
We owe it to victims and to the wider public to respond
with clarity, consistency, and compassion.
And we owe it to dogs to make decisions based on evidence
and risk and not on labels.
A behavior-based stepped framework grounded in a,
an objective by scale, delivered
by accredited professionals paired
with victim centered practice.
And national reporting can make our
communities and dogs safer.
The veterinary profession stands ready to help
with technical details
and to support councils to make this work on the ground.
Thank you for your time.
Alright, thank you.
Um, one question I have is that, um,
you're from the veterinary Association.
Um, when would you, when,
when would these incidents come to you?
Because, you know, you wouldn't,
the victims aren't come to you.
Um, they're only gonna come to you presumably
when there's a dispute around the future of the dog.
Would that be fair?
In some cases we do see the victims come through as well,
um, as, as part of that, particularly if it is a dog known
to them, um, which it, it often is.
Um, so we, we definitely do see
that the victims in these situations as well.
So that's where the victim and the dog are the they know,
you know, it's, it's a it's a family dog in
Those cases. Yeah. Which, which
can often be the case. Yep.
Which is quite different from
what we've been talking about where you've got a dog
that's attacking someone.
Um, as in the case that we've just heard about, um,
they, they aren't going to come
before you aren't the veterinary association.
In reality, people are gonna approach you when they've got a
dog that they need behavioral modification.
Would that be fair?
Yep. Yep. That, that would be fair in a lot of cases.
Um, you know, and we, we sort of, we, we see
that when we have the dogs in full consultations
and if we can have that contact point
and we can, we can see some of those red flags,
then we can suggest, um, you know, behaviorist intervention,
um, to try and stop those sorts of problems happening. Um,
But cu current, current,
what I was say currently at the moment, if we get a a,
a random dog attack, um,
and it's going through the court processes and normal
nor normally it would not come
before the veterinary association
or vet, um, is what I'm point,
I'm making you looking at a relatively
generally from the relatively a, um, confined part
of the problems of dog attacks on humans,
which is the owners.
Yeah. Correct. Yeah.
Okay, well thank you for clarifying that. Yes.
Um, yes members, any other questions? Alright, thank you.
Um, please, we were able to get there in the end.
Uh, we'd have missed a lot. We'd had to miss that, uh,
miss that presentation.
So thank you very much. Thank
You.
Right. SBCA?
Yes. Uh, Dr. Vaughn,
you Oh, you can hear me?
We can hear you. Uh, thank you very much.
Um, you've got the select committee here, so,
um, petitions committee.
Looking forward to hearing from you for 10 minutes.
Be good to have some time for questions at the end.
Absolutely. We have got, we have got your
submission and it's been read
Super well, thank you very much for the opportunity
to present to the committee today on this,
uh, important topic.
Um, I think I have presented some
of you already in previous petitions,
but I am Dr. Allison Vaughn.
I'm presenting on behalf of the SPCA
and I've been a scientific officer with SPCA
for over seven years and have a background in
applied animal behavior.
We are concerned SPCA with the welfare of dogs
and other animals, but also
with promoting responsible dog ownership.
And we work closely with councils up
and down the country to address shared concerns
regarding dogs.
Um, as you've said, you have our written submissions,
so I will briefly focus on some key points.
Firstly, the Dog Control Act is outdated.
This act is over 30 years old
and it has had only minor amendments, um,
and hasn't had a substantive review, um,
since it was introduced.
As a result, it hasn't kept pace
with modern science or best practice.
And the result is this inconsistency across councils.
So right now, a similar instance can be treated very
differently depending on where they occur.
And this is stressful for victims, confusing
for dog guardians and undermines public trust.
Now dog bites are an emotive issue
and this is justifiably so these incidents can be traumatic
for those involved and they also create a lot of political
and community pressure for action.
This is really commendable,
but is important that we don't miss opportunities when
taking action in terms of amending legislation.
And it's really important
that when we do change legislation,
the responses are grounded in evidence.
And so we're actually introducing something
that will be effective in reducing dog
by incidents in New Zealand.
I, on that note, would like to commend the petitioner, um,
for advocating for an evidence-based proportionate response
that would both improve how we deal with dog bite incidents
and address the current postcode lottery
we have across New Zealand.
In terms of cancel responses,
we support the petition's call
for a nationally mandated stepped response
framework based on evidence.
So this should include the use
of an evidence-based tool such as the inbar bite scale, um,
which is widely used, um, here in New Zealand,
but also, uh, around the world.
And the benefit of, uh, using objective bite scale like this
is that it standardizes not just the assessment of severity
and context of the bite,
but also helps us to understand the risk
of a dog biting again.
So it does this
because the scale incorporates the
concept of bite inhibition.
Now anyone who has had any interactions
with puppies will know
that they have very sharp little teeth.
And this is partly
because as puppies interact with their litter mates
and other dogs and with people, um,
they learn if they bite too hard
with these little needle teeth, the play stops.
And this helps them over time learn
to moderate their jaw pressure.
So a dog that has learned bite inhibition,
even when it bites, will usually not cause um, the sort
of very severe end of the skill in terms of injury.
Um, so that helps us know if a dog bit a a bite level too,
while they may bite again, if in certain contexts, um,
it's unlikely that this level of the bite would escalate,
um, equally with a dog that has bitten at uh,
bite level five, um, we would consider that dog very risky.
Um, regardless of the the context
because it doesn't have bite inhibition.
Um, the other things we, um,
have included in our submission in terms of
what we would like to see is proportional enforcement
actions that take into account the circumstances,
the dog's behavioral history and that severity
and context of the injury sustained.
And we'd really like
to see standardized communication protocols
to ensure timely, transparent
and supportive engagement, both for the victim
and for the dog's guardian.
These cases are very traumatic for everyone involved
and we would like to see a requirement
to consider animal welfare
and public safety together not in isolation.
So in some of these cases, dogs can be confined for
very long periods of time as while these cases are ongoing
and that often leads to the
deterioration in the dog's behavior.
So even if they're released, they could become a concern and
but also really impacts their welfare.
We also included in our submission, if we are going
to look at the Dog control act,
we should be looking at breed specific legislation
and looking at repealing that we know
beyond question breeds specific legislation is not effective
at protecting the public from dog bites.
In fact, the fact that councils are currently required
to follow the Dog Control Act
and to take action on um, dogs in schedule four means
that they're having to commit resources to that
that could be better spent on
something we know is effective.
Um, we would also, um,
support better data collection consistent de sectioning
requirements before rehoming targeted des sectioning
for roaming dogs and licensing of breeders
with enforceable welfare standards.
We know that in terms of, uh, reducing dog by incidents,
behavior-based approaches paired with owner education
and responsible containment are more effective
and fairer than breed specific legislation.
So we would like to, again, thank the petitioner
for lodging this petition.
We think it is an important first step toward making the dog
control act fit for purpose
and evidence-based nationally consistent guidelines,
including a robust dog bite, uh,
assessment will make our communities safer,
improve animal welfare
and support responsible dog guardianship.
And we stand ready to work with government
and councils to develop and implement any changes.
With that, I'll hand over my remaining time for questions.
Great. Alright. Thank you.
Look, I'm just gonna ask a quick couple of questions here.
One is that, um, as an SBCA, how do you deal
with these dog bite complaints?
How do they come to you? Um,
because generally I, I guess it would be
the offenses being committed.
I mean there's the same question I asked the veterinary
association because the random ones that go
through the council take through the courts
generally wouldn't come to you.
Would that be a fair case? Fair summation
That that would be fair. So
we don't enforce the dog control act.
That is the councils who do that.
Um, however, we do assess dogs before we rehome them.
And part of that assessment is their behavior.
And because we have a responsibility
to ensure we're not re-homing dogs
that are at risk to our communities.
Um, so this is why we take an evidence-based approach
and we are experienced in, in working
through this in terms of dogs.
So the offend the, the offending dogs for the want
of a better word, the ones that have been so
that they generally wouldn't come
before you that that you wouldn't have access to that sort
of criteria that, how the circumstances of
that, would that be fair?
Yeah, so the dogs that come to us come to us
because of welfare concerns.
Some of them have, um, difficult histories
and they may have behavioral issues as a result of that.
Um, so dog bites are sometimes
something we have to consider.
Um, but that's in the context
of considering the dog's overall behavior in terms
of their welfare
and the most responsible, um, outcomes in terms
of both their welfare and community safety.
Alright, thank you. Um, yes. Hey, uh,
Thank you Dr. Vaughn.
Um, Tay, from what you have, have told the committee, um,
and I appreciate in your written submission submission,
you've talked about many dog bites occur in context
involving fear, pain, uh, pro, pro,
I can't even say the word now, uh, due
to inappropriate human behavior.
Um, are you saying if, and,
and you were talking about the the bite scale.
Um, if a dog bites at level five, uh, do you think that
that dog is, um, a huge risk despite
what context that bite was given at?
Um, or do you think kind of the,
it's a fairly serious bite once you get to five mm-hmm.
Um, or is it still context dependent?
So it's a really good question.
So while the context may help us understand why the dog, um,
bit the person or
or other animal, um, important thing in terms of the level
and especially at bite level five, is
that it demonstrates a lack of bite inhibition.
Hmm. So if the dog were to bite again, whatever the context,
whether they provoked and it wasn't their fault
or the dog attacked someone, um, they have the potential
to cause very serious harm.
Um, in comparison to a dog who may be, um,
we know certain dog breeds nip more like a colleague.
Um, if a colleague had nipped more than once, I wouldn't be
as concerned versus a dog with one level five
by in, uh, incident.
Um, and that's due to the bite inhibition issue.
Mm mm So, so, so, so yeah,
what you're saying is if a dog doesn't have an
inhibition, it has the pot.
It is, it is a dog, a risk, a risky dog.
And if we were gonna put legislation in place that may lead
to euthanasia, then, then, uh, level five would be
should you
We would not rehome, we would
not rehome a dog with a bite.
Level five. Yep. Thank you.
Alright, look, thank you very much again.
Um, I've had three very good submissions on this
to compliment, um, Ms.
McGregor. Uh, I Thanks. Still listening.
So, um, thank you very much for all our submitters.
Um, the committee will now consider the evidence we've heard
and submit a report.
So thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you.